---
title: Vim, Tmux, and Vim plugins
date: 2023-12-13 9:32:28
tags:
- Tool
categories:
- Notes
---

# VIM

## Basic

### Command-line

- `:e {name of file}` open file for editing
- `:ls` show open buffers
- `:help {topic}` open help
  - `:help :w` opens help for the `:w` command
  - `:help w` opens help for the `w` movement

### Movement

**Movements in Vim are also called “nouns”.**

- Basic movement: `hjkl` (left, down, up, right)
- Words: `w` (next word), `b` (beginning of word), `e` (end of word)
- Lines: `0` (beginning of line), `^` (first non-blank character), `$` (end of line)
- Screen: `H` (top of screen), `M` (middle of screen), `L` (bottom of screen)
- Scroll: `Ctrl-u` (up), `Ctrl-d` (down)
- File: `gg` (beginning of file), `G` (end of file)
- Line numbers: `:{number}<CR>` or `{number}G` (line {number})
- Misc: `%` (corresponding item)
- Find: `f{character}`, `t{character}`, `F{character}`, `T{character}`
  - find/to forward/backward {character} on the current line
  - `,` / `;` for navigating matches
- Search: `/{regex}`, `n` / `N` for navigating matches

### Edits

**Vim’s editing commands are also called “verbs”**

- `i` enter Insert mode
- `o` / `O` insert line below / above
- `d{motion}` delete {motion}
  - e.g. `dw` is delete word, `d$` is delete to end of line, `d0` is delete to beginning of line
- `c{motion}` change {motion}
  - e.g. `cw` is change word. like `d{motion}` followed by `i`
- `x` delete character (equal do `dl`)
- `s` substitute character (equal to `cl`)
- Visual mode + manipulation
  - select text, `d` to delete it or `c` to change it
- `u` to undo, `<Ctrl+r>` to redo
- `y` to copy / “yank” (some other commands like `d` also copy)
- `p` to paste
- Lots more to learn: e.g. `~` flips the case of a character

### Counts

You can combine **nouns** and **verbs** with a **count**, which will perform a given action a number of times.

- `3w` move 3 words forward
- `5j` move 5 lines down
- `7dw` delete 7 words

### Modifiers

You can use modifiers to change the meaning of a noun. Some modifiers are `i`, which means “inner” or “inside”, and `a`, which means “around”.

> 光标在括号中，`ci(`可以把括号内的内容替换并进入 insert，类似`di(`也一样，相当于删除。`da(`连带括号一起删除。
>
> 这里的`i`和`a`不是 edit 中的含义，而是**inner**和**around**的意思。

- `ci(` change the contents inside the current pair of parentheses
- `ci[` change the contents inside the current pair of square brackets
- `da'` delete a single-quoted string, including the surrounding single quotes

### Tabs 标签页

`gt`, `gT` 切换标签页。
`Ctrl-w c` 关闭当前标签页。

### Windows 窗口

`Ctrl-w h/j/k/l` 移动到左/下/上/右窗口
`Ctrl-w c`
`Ctrl w w`: 循环窗口切换。

## Customizing Vim

[my vim config](https://github.com/YC-Xiang/dotfiles/blob/main/.vimrc)

## Extending Vim

Vim 8.0 之后自带插件管理工具，只要 create the directory `~/.vim/pack/vendor/start/`, and put plugins in there (e.g. via `git clone`). `vendor`目录名好像可以替换。

## Advanced Vim

### Search and replace

`:s` (substitute) command

- `%s/foo/bar/g`
  - replace foo with bar globally in file

### Multiple windows

- `:sp` / `:vsp` to split windows
- Can have multiple views of the same buffer.

### Macros

to do

### Register

`"ayiw` 将内容保存进寄存器 a。  
`Ctrl-r a` insert mode 下将寄存器内容粘贴出来。

### Misc

`gUw` 转大写  
`guw` 转小写

## Vscode Vim

`gd`: 函数定义跳转。  
`C-o`: 返回。  
`gh`: 原地查看函数信息。

`setting.json`: 配置 vim 快捷键。

`C-q`: visual block.  
visual 模式选中后，`I`进入 muti-cursor 进行多行编辑。

`C-shift-e`: 跳转资源管理器。  
`C-shift-c`: 聚焦到大纲。

```json
/***vscode vim***/
"vim.useSystemClipboard": true,
"vim.incsearch": true,
"vim.hlsearch": true,
"vim.easymotion": true,
"vim.leader": "<space>",
"vim.insertModeKeyBindings": [
{
"before": ["j", "j"],
"after": ["<Esc>"]
}
],
"vim.normalModeKeyBindings": [
{
"before": ["<Enter>"],
"after": ["o", "<Esc>"]
},
{
"before": ["<C-v>"],
"after": ["i", "<C-v>","<Esc>"]
}
],

"vim.handleKeys": {
	"<C-a>": false,
	"<C-x>": false,
	"<C-f>": false,
	"<C-h>": false,
	"<C-n>": false,
	"<C-p>": false,
	"<C-y>": false,
	"<C-g>": false,
	"<Shift+Tab>": false
},
```

# Tmux

~/.tmux.conf 可修改 tmux 配置。

`tmux`: open a new session.  
`C-b` -> `C-a`  
`C-b %`: 左右分屏。改为-> `C-a |`  
`C-b "`: 上下分屏。-> `C-a -`  
`C-b <arrow key>`:在 panes 间移动。-> `alt + arrow`  
`exit` or hit `Ctrl-d`：退出当前 pane。  
`C-b c`: new window.  
`C-b p`: previous window.  
`C-b n`: next window.  
`C-b <number>` : move to window n.  
`tmux ls`: list sessions.  
`tmux attach -t 0`: attach to 0 session.  
`C-b ?`: help message.  
`C-b z`: make a pane go full screen. Hit `C-b z` again to shrink it back to its previous size  
`C-b C-<arrow key>`: 调整当前 window 的大小。  
`C-b ,`: 重命令当前 window。  
`<C-b> [` Start scrollback. You can then press `<space>` to start a selection and `<enter>` to copy that selection.

## my configs

`C-b` -> `C-a`  
`C-b %` -> `C-a |`  
`C-b "` -> `C-a -`  
`C-b <arrow key>` -> `alt <arrow key>`

# Reference

https://learnvim.irian.to/
